Add documentation about analytics (#33)
front-commerce/developers.front-commerce.com: source/docs/advanced/theme/analytics.md

---
id: analytics
title: Analytics
---

> Most e-commerce website need full blown analytics to better understand their users and adapt their shops to their customers needs. But it can often be tedious to manage when you have many trackings to manage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most e-commerce website need advanced analytics to better understand their users and adapt their shops to their customers needs. But it can often be tedious to maintain when you have many trackings to manage.
```

In Front-Commerce, we use [`analytics.js`](https://segment.com/docs/sources/website/analytics.js/). It is a library created by [Segment.io](https://segment.com/) that aims at decoupling the tracking settings from the event.

If we represent how it works, it would look like this:

<figure>
![Schema explaining the concepts behind analytics.js](./assets/analytics.svg)
</figure>

> Through your React application, you track events thanks to methods like `trackEvent` or `trackPage`. Then, the event is dispatched to all the integrations registered in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Across your React application, you can track events using functions such as `trackEvent` or `trackPage`. Then, the event is dispatched to all the relevant integrations registered in your application.
```

> This means that once you have correctly configurer your events in your React Components, adding new trackings can be really fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that once you have correctly configured events in your React Components, adding new trackings can be really straightforward.
```

## Track an event

An event is something that happens in your application. For instance, it can happens when a user clicks on a button, opens a dropdown, etc. It usually conveys meaning to your marketing team to better understand what drives your users.

Most of the e-commerce related events are already implemented within Front-Commerce. But each website will have different behaviors, and it can be interesting to add your own events to see how your customers uses your application.

To do so, you will need to call the method `trackEvent` from `web/utils/analytics`.

> For instance, let's say that you are building a grocery store and that you have created Recipe pages that display displays at the end the list of ingredients needed for the current recipe. Below this list, you have a created a button that adds all the ingredients to the cart of the user, and you want to know if this button is useful and if the users click on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, let's say that you are building a grocery store and that you have created Recipe pages that display a list of ingredients needed for the current recipe. Below this list, you have a created a button that adds all the ingredients to the cart of the user, and you want to know if this button is useful and if users click on it.
```

The button would likely be a component that would look like this:

```jsx
import React from "react";
import Button from "theme/components/atoms/Button";

const AddIngredientsToCart = ({addToCart}) => {
  return (
    <Button onClick={() => {
      addToCart();
    }}>
      Add ingredients
    </Button>
  );
}

export default AddIngredientsToCart;
```

To add your tracking, you would need to call the `trackEvent` method when the user clicks on the Button. Thus, your new component would look like this:

```diff
import React from "react";
import Button from "theme/components/atoms/Button";
+import { trackEvent } from "web/core/analytics";

const AddIngredientsToCart = ({addToCart, ingredients}) => {
  return (
    <Button onClick={() => {
+     trackEvent("Added ingredients to cart", {
+       ingredients: ingredients
+     });
      addToCart();
    }}>
      Add ingredients
    </Button>
  );
}

export default AddIngredientsToCart;
```

> This `trackEvent` method is actually a short cut that lets you call the `analytics.track` method of `analytics.js`. It uses the exact same API. See [the document] for more detailed information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `trackEvent` method is actually a shortcut that lets you call the `analytics.track` method of `analytics.js`. It uses the exact same API. See [the official documentation](https://segment.com/docs/spec/track/) for more detailed information.
```

Additionally, you may wonder what name and properties you should give to your events. It depends on the integrations you are using and if you want to create a new event or use Semantic ones (supported events within Segment.io). To learn more about this, please refere to the [Semantic Events documentation](https://segment.com/docs/spec/semantic/).

### Track an event as a React Component

If you don't have an actual callback where to put the `trackEvent` (like `onClick`), you can use the `withTrackOnMount` enhancer that will let you call the `trackEvent` using [React lifecycle]((http://projects.wojtekmaj.pl/react-lifecycle-methods-diagram/)).

```jsx
import withTrackOnMount from "theme/modules/Analytics/withTrackOnMount";

> withTrackOnMount({

Reviewer: It would be great to extract this in the Reference section (along with the `<TrackOnMount />` component) and prefer an example here. We could use an example from the core for instance.

        shouldMountEvent={props => true || false}
        shouldUpdateEvent={(prevProps, nextProps) => true || false}
        event={event}
        properties={eventProperties}
        isResolvedFromProps={true || false}
    />
    {/* ... your actual component code here */}
  </Fragment>;
}
```

### Track page

In trackings scripts, there is often a distinction between the `page` and the `event` even though a `page` event is only a subset of the `event`s.

To make this distinction clear, we provide APIs in the same spirit of `withTrackOnMount` and `TrackOnMount` but for page events.

* `withTrackPage` is an enhancer that lets you track a page each time a component is rendered and when the location has changed
```jsx
import withTrackPage from "theme/modules/Analytics/withTrackPage";

withTrackPage("My Page")(BaseComponent);
```
* `TrackPage` is a component using the Render Props paradigm
```jsx
import React, { Fragment } from "react";
import { TrackPage } from "theme/modules/Analytics/withTrackPage";

const Component = (props) => {
  return <Fragment>
    <TrackPage title="My Page" />
    {/* ... your actual component code here */}
  </Fragment>;
}
```

<blockquote class="note">

> Note that we didn't talk about a `trackPage` method here. This is because a `Page` is tighlty coupled to a React Component. This is why you shouldn't need to use `trackPage` directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that we didn't talk about a `trackPage` method here. This is because a `Page` is tightly coupled to a React Component. This is why you shouldn't need to use `trackPage` directly.
```

```js
export default [
  {
    // Category of cookies to allow the user to accept all the integrations at once in a specific category
    title: "Analytics",
    description:
      "These cookies allows us to measure the traffic on our contents and hence to improve them.",
    services: [
      {
        // The name should be the same as mentionned in the `config/analytics.js` file
        name: "google-analytics",
        title: "Google Analytics",
        // display all the cookies managed by Google Analytics
        cookies: [
          "_ga",
          "_gat",
          "_gid",
          "__utma",
          "__utmb",
          "__utmc",
          "__utmt",
          "__utmz"
        ],
        description:
          "Google Analytics cookies, from Google, are meant to gather statistics about visits.",
        link: "https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6004245"
      }
    ]
  }
];
```

### How to create a custom integration?

<blockquote class="wip">
Currently, the integrations creation is not documented by Segment.io. We plan to add information here to help you to:

> * define an integration that will add a specific pixel on a specific page

Reviewer: The list is not rendered properly here.

We should use `<ul>` and `<li>`s in this case (I have not yet found a better solution).
